.TH getstr 1 "Version VERSION"
.ds -- \-\^\-
.ds b[ \fR[\|\fP
.ds b] \fR\|]\fP

.SH NAME
getstr \- extract vars from a vamps output file

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B getstr
.B \*(b[\*(--help\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--Header\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--copyright\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--license\*(b]
.BI \*(b[\*(b[\*(--section\   section\*(b]
.BI \*(b[--name\   name\*(b]...\*(b]
.BI \*(b[\*(--Comment\   commentchar\*(b]
.BI \*(b[\*(--index\   indexfile\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--exit\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--verbose\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--print-as-array\*(b]
.I filename

.SH DESCRIPION
.B getstr
Can be used to extract information from
.B vamps
output/input files. It is intended for use in any scripts the uses
needs to post- or preprocess 
.B vamps
data files.
The
.B vsel(1)
utillity should be sufficient for most users, but one never knows.
Input is read from either 
.I filename
or standard input. If 
.I filename
is specified as a single dash
.RB `` \- '',
it is taken from standard input. Output is written to the standard
output. 

.SH OPTIONS
Options may be given as either standard
one-letter options, or GNU style long options. Long options start with
two dashes
.RB `` \*(-- ''
and may be truncated to any unambiguous abbreviation.

.TP
.B \*(--copyright
Show copyright information and exit

.TP
.B \*(--Header
Omit headers from output.

.TP
.B \*(--license
Print license information and exit.

.TP
.B \*(--verbose
Increase verbose level.

.TP
.B \*(--help
Print help text and exit.

.TP
.BI \*(--index\   indexfile
Use section-index from
.I indexfile
This provides much faster output from large files. You can build
an index with the
.BR vsel (1)
program.

.TP
.BI \*(--section\   section
Search for the section
.IR section .
Each section argument should have a coresponding name argument.

.TP
.BI \*(--name\   name
Search for name
.IR name .
Each name argument should have a coresponding section argument.

.TP
.BI \*(--Comment\   commentchar
Set the commentchar to char
.I commentchar.

.TP
.B \*(--exit
Don't produce any output but set the exitlevel (for use in scrips etc.).
The level is set to 1 if
.I name
is not found in section
.I section.
If the name is found, the exitlevel is set to 0.

.TP
.B \*(--print-as-array
The variable will be printed as a column of floating point values.

.SH USAGE
All options cane be entered as GNU style long options or abbriviated
to the first letter op the option.

If multiple names are searched for and the \*(--exit\ option is used
the results are AND.

.SH EXAMPLES
To display the variable description in section soil in the file
tt.tt:
.br
.B getstr \-s soil \-n description tt.tt

To check for the existance of a variable in a (csh) script you could use:
.br
.B getstr \-e \-s vamps \-n verbose testfile && echo "variable verbose exists in section vamps of testfile"

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vamps (5),
.BR issec (1),
.BR vsel (1).


.SH AUTHOR
J. Schellekens
.br
schj@geo.vu.nl
.br
schj@xs4all.nl


.SH BUGS
;-)
