.TH issec 1 "Version VERSION"
.ds -- \-\^\-
.ds b[ \fR[\|\fP
.ds b] \fR\|]\fP

.SH NAME
issec \- test for existance of a section in an vamps input/output file

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B issec
.B \*(b[\*(--help\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--Header\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--copyright\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--license\*(b]
.BI \*(b[\*(--section\   section\*(b]
.BI \*(b[\*(--Comment\   commentchar\*(b]
.B \*(b[\*(--exit\*(b]
.I filename

.SH DESCRIPION
.B issec
can be used to test the existance of a section in a 
.B vamps
input/output file.
.B issec
output a singe '1' if a section is not found and a '0' if
the section is found.

Input is read from either 
.I filename
or standard input. If
.I filename
is specified as a single dash
.RB `` \- '',
it is taken from standard input. Output is written to the standard
output. 


.SH OPTIONS
Options may be given as either standard
one-letter options, or GNU style long options. Long options start with
two dashes
.RB `` \*(-- ''
and may be truncated to any unambiguous abbreviation.

.TP
.B \*(--copyright
Show copyright information and exit

.TP
.B \*(--Header
Omit header from the output.

.TP
.B \*(--license
Print license information and exit.

.TP
.B \*(--help
Print help text and exit.

.TP
.BI \*(--section\   section
Specify the name of the section to search for. 

.TP
.BI \*(--Comment\   commentchar
Set the commentchar to char
.I commentchar.

.TP
.B \*(--exit
Don't produce any output but set the exitlevel (for use in scrips etc.).
The level is set to 1 if
.I section
is not found.
If the section is found, the exitlevel is set to 0.



.SH EXAMPLES
To check for the existance of the section vamps in the file veluwe.inp:
.br
.B issec \-s vamps veluwe.inp

The following example uses the 
.B \-e
option and the && operator (unix csh) top print a message if the section time
does exists in the file test.inp:
.br
.B issec \-e time test.inp && echo "Section time exists in file test.inp"

    
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR vamps (5),
.BR getstr (1).


.SH AUTHOR
J. Schellekens
.br
schj@geo.vu.nl


.SH BUGS
;-)
