.TH vamps 5 "Version VERSION"

.SH NAME
* \- files in vamps output/input format

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vamps
(see
.BR vamps (1)
for a description) reads it's options and most of the data needed for
modeling from the input file. This file is in plain ascii format and
is divided in several sections.  An input file must be created before
running
.BR vamps .
An ascii editor or a word-processing package can be used to create the
input file.  This manual page can be used a a reference when creating
an input file for vamps. You probably can have a faster start by
looking in the examples directory and taking one of the example files
as a start.

The input file format for vamps is much like Microsoft Windows .ini
files.  All names and sections are case insensitive.  The case of
string variables is unaltered so filenames are case-sensitive if the
operating system is.  The file is divided into sections which each
contain variables that have some connection with each other.  Each
variable name is followed by an equal sign ('=') after which the value
of the variable is placed.  Example:

.br
[vamps]
.br
verbose = TRUE
.br
# This is a comment
.br
[environment]
.br
caseid = Interception test file. Bisley catchment.\\
.br
Summer of 1995
.br

The \\ character may be use to break up long strings over more than
one line. Only the first '=' sign is significant. Spaces within the
names are copied verbatim, and thus become part of the name. This
makes the following construction  legal:

.br
[vamps]
.br
output mode = This is ('=') a nonsense\
.br
example.
.br

In this case the variable name in section 'vamps' is 'output mode' and
it's value is 'This is ('=') a nonsense example'.

.B  vamps
uses six types of variables: 
.I (1)
floats (floating point
numbers), 
.I (2)
arrays (a row of floating point numbers separated
by whitespace), 
.I (3) 
strings (a series of characters), 
.I (4)
integers (whole signed numbers),
.I (5)
characters ( a single printable character) and 
.I (6)
boolean (special kind
of integer, either 0 or 1 (FALSE of TRUE), NO or YES). 

.SH ALLOWED SETNAMES
.TP
.B pre
precipitation [cm/day] 
.TP
.B rlh
relative humidity [%] 
.TP
.B hea
head at bottom [cm] 
.TP
.B rdp
rooting depth [cm] 
.TP
.B tem
dry bulb temp [oC] 
.TP
.B gwt
ground-water table [cm] 
.TP
.B inr
interception [cm/day] 
.TP
.B pev
potential evaporation [cm/day] 
.TP
.B spe
potential soil evaporation [cm/day] 
.TP
.B ptr
potential transpiration [cm/day] 
.TP
.B qbo
flow through bottom of profile [cm/day] 
.TP
.B vol
actual water content [cm] 
.TP
.B avt
average theta in profile 
.TP
.B lai
leaf area index 
.TP
.B sca
canopy storage [cm???] 
.TP
.B ira
incoming radiation [W/m2] 
.TP
.B nra
net radiation [W/m2] 
.TP
.B win
windspeed [m/s] 


.SH SUMMARY OF INPUT FILE
This section list all the variables and section recognized by the
.B vamps
model. You will need this list badly when  you construct an input file
for vamps. Once the  graphical  preprocessor is finished  things  will
become a little easier.

.B vamps
has been developed using the
.B swap94
FORTRAN  code as a starting point.   Most names of  variables have been
changed (sorry) but  some  of  the variable names   as well  as  their
physical meaning have not altered.


.SH [time]
.TP 
.B steps
integer value specifying the number of steps in the current simulation.
This value should be smaller or equal to the number of entries in the
precipitation file.
.TP
.B starttime
day at   which  the simulation   should start  If this  value   is not
specified simulation starts at   the  first step in  the  precipitation
input file. If both starttime and startpos are specified starttime
will be used. (NOT WORKIING AT PRESENT)	
.TP
.B startpos
position  (line) in precipitation  input used as  start (note that the
first line is number 0) (NOT WORKIING AT PRESENT) 

.SH [run]
.TP
.B outputfile
Filename to save output to. You can override this with the \-o command
line option.
.TP
.B runid
Not used at moment
.B description
String with some sort of description

.SH [xout]
.TP
.B filename
Filename for extra output in column-type format. No xtra output is generated
if this variable is not present.

.SH [determine]
.TP
.B canopy
determine canopy (see section canopy)
.TP
.B evaporation
determine actual evaporation (see section evaporation)
.TP
.B pevaporation
determine potential evaporation (see section pevaporation)
.TP
.B soilmoisture
determine soil-moisture profile (see section soil)

.SH [pevaporation]
.TP 
.B method
0 = potential evaporation via Penman E0 (Need: refrad, netrad, rhumid,
windspeed, temp, inrad)
.br
1 =  potential evaporation   via  Penman E0 (using   sunratio)  (Need:
sunratio, rhumid, windspeed, temp, inrad)
.br
2 and 3 = not yet done
.br
4 =  potential evaporation using    Makkink (Need: rhumid,  windspeed,
temp, inrad)

.SH [evaporation]
.TP
.B method
0 = evaporation equal to potential evaporation
.br
1 = multiply potential evaporation by a crop factor (need cropfac)
.br
2 = calculate actual evaporation using the Penman-Montheith formula
.TP
.B cropfac
A  floating point number  representing the crop  factor with which the
potential evaporation is to be multiplied to yield actual evaporation.


.SH [interception]
.TP
.B method
0, 1 , 2, 3
.br
gash, rutter laifrac or calder
.TP
.B gamma
gamma in calder equation
.TP
.B delta
delta in calder equation
.TP
.B E_avg/R
Evaporation/Average Rainfall during a storm   in gash. If this is  not
set penman/Montheith will be used with Ra set to zero.
.TP
.B p_tr
Fraction of water diverted to the trunk (gash, rutter)
.TP
.B p_f
Free throughfall coefficient (gash, rutter)
.TP
.B S
Canopy storage in cm (gash, rutter)
.TP
.B gashm
Either 1 or 0. If set to 1 an adapted version of gash is used. This
version should work for time-steps smaller then 1 day. Default = 0
.TP
.B laifrac
the canopy interception coefficient
.TP
.B lai
The canopy leaf area index. This is needed for the laifrac method or
for gash if the gash parameters are given per unit lai. If
it is not present it is searched in the canopy section.

.SH [top]
.TP
.B system
Integer number specifying the topsystem to use.
.br
0: Empty topsystem
.br
1: Bare soil
.br
2: Full canopy
.br
3: Partial canopy
.br
4: All canopy stuff precalculated
.br
5: Old canopy.c topsystem
.br
6: Scripting language based top-system
.br
.TP
.B soilevaporation 
Method for determining soilevaporation (if the notree topsystem is used).
In this case interception and
transpiration are always zero. All available energy is used for soil
evaporation. At the moment soilevaporation can be calculated using one of
the folowing methods:
.br
0	E0SUNRAD
.br
1	E0NETRAD
.br
2	PENMON_NOSOIL
.br
3	PENMON_SOIL
.br
4	MAKKINK
.br

The following datasets are
.I always
needed: rlh, tem.  For MAKKINK: ira. For E0SUNRAD: ira, win, sur.
For E0NETRAD: ira, ref, win, nra. 	


.SH [canopy]
Although you don't have to use the canopy module it is recommend that
you do so if possible. The other methods of determining transpiration,
interception etc. don't have a close interaction with the soil modules
and usually provide poorer results.

.TP
.B layers
Number of canopy layers (this is largely determined by the accuracy of your
LAI profile). At the moment only one layer is allowed.
.TP
.B Rnet_absorb
The fraction of the total radiation absorbed by the canopy (0< <1). The remaining
amount will be used for soil evaporation.
.TP
.B transpiration
Which transpiration equation should be used.
.br
2 = penman Montheith
.br
3 = read from ptr in the ts section
.br
.TP
.B z
Height of the canopy (m)
.TP
.B z_0
Aerodynamic roughness length (m)
.TP
.B d
Zero plane displacement length (m)
.TP
.B rs
Canopy resistance (s/m). If this is not specified the user defined regression 
equation 
.B estrs()
will be used.

.TP
.B drytime
If this variable is set this value (in days) will be used to determine
how long it takes for the canopy to dry. 

.TP
.B wetevap
If this variable is set this value (in cm/day) will be used to determine
the canopy wat evaporation rate in stead of Penman-Montheith with
Rs set to zero.

.SH [roots]
.TP 
.B depth
depth of the root zone in cm. If you want rooting depth to change
in time you should  use the drootz variable in the ts section.
.TP
.B swsink
0 = sink term according to Feddes. (Need: 
.BR hlim1\ hlim2u\ hlim2l\ hlim3h\ hlim3l\ hlim4 )
.br
1 = sink term according to Hoogland. (Need:
.BR hlim1\ hlim2u\ hlim2l\ hlim3\ hlim4 )
.TP
.B swhypr
0 = linear relation between the points 
.B hlim3
and 
.B hlim4 
of the sink term.
.br
1 = hyperbolic relation between the points 
.B hlim3
and
.B hlim4
of the sink term.
.TP
.B swupfu
0 = water uptake function according to Feddes.
.br
1 = water uptake function according to Hoogland.
.br
2 = water uptake function according to Prasad (1988).
.br
3 = simple uptake function (no reduction but according to rootfrac)
.TP
.B cofsza
Intercept a in Feddes et. al 1988 (only needed if 
.B swupfu 
=1.
.TP
.B cofszb
slope b in Feddes et. al. 1988. (only needed if 
.B swupfu 
=1.
.TP
.B hlim1
pressure head value (cm) below which roots start to extract water from
the upper soil layer (starting point).
.TP
.B hlim2u
pressure head value (cm) below which roots start to extract water optimally from
the upper soil layer.
.TP
.B hlim2l
as above, but for all lower soil layers.
.TP
.B hlim3h
pressure head value (cm) below which roots cannot extract water optimally any more,
for a High pot. transpiration rate equal to 0.5 cm/d (limiting point).
.TP
.B hlim3l
as above, but for low pot. transpiration rate equal to 0.1 cm/d.
.TP
.B hlim3
pressure head value (cm) below which roots cannot extract water any more (limiting point).

.TP
.B hlim4
pressure head value (cm) below which no water uptake by roots is possible (wilting point).

.SH [ts]
The ts section has one entry that 
.I must
be present:
pre.  This set contains the precipitation data. The precipitation file
is important because it also determines the time-steps at which output
is calculated. 

The file format consists of colums separeted by whitespace (space
or tabs).  
.B Vamps
assumes the first column to hold the time and the
second column to hold the value. You can override these assumptions by
appending  ,xcol,ycol to the filename. Counting begins at zero.

The ts section can be handy if you don't like the method(s) which
.B vamps
can use for determining things like potential evaporation.
Simply put them in here and
.B vamps
will use the values you supplied
instead.

The following sets are allowed in the ts section:

.TP
.B pev
name of file with potential evaporation data [cm] (if not calculated)
.TP
.B ptr
name of file with potential transpiration data [cm] (if not calculated)
.TP
.B pre
name of file with precipitation data [cm]
.TP
.B rdp
name of file with rooting depth [cm] in time. You need to specify
at least three points. Other points will be interpolated using
a spline is they don't exist. See the file ts_spl.c for the
interpolation routine.
.TP
.B qbo
name of the file with given flux at bottom node [cm] (bottom condition
1). You need to specify at least three points. Other points will be
interpolated using a spline is they don't exist. See the file ts_spl.c
for the interpolation routine.
.TP
.B hea
name of the file with given head at bottom node [cm] (bottom condition 
4). You need to specify at least three points. Other points will be
interpolated using a spline is they don't exist. See the file ts_spl.c
for the interpolation routine.
.TP
.B gwt
name of the file with given groundwater level [cm] (bottom condition 
0). You need to specify at least three points. Other points will be
interpolated using a spline is they don't exist. See the file ts_spl.c
for the interpolation routine.
.TP
.B rlh
name of the file containing relative humidity data [%].
.TP
.B tem
name of the file containing temperature data [oC].
.TP
.B inr
name of the file containing incoming radiation data [W/m2]
.TP
.B spe
name of the file containing potential soil evaporation data [cm]
.TP
.B lai
name of the file containing leaf area index information
.TP
.B sca
name of the file containing canopy storage information [cm?]
.TP
.B win
name of the file containing windspeed data [m/s]
.TP
.B nra
name of the file containing net radiation data [W/m2]




.SH [soil]
.TP
.B outskip
Skip every
.B outskip
time-steps in output
.TP
.B bottom
Bottom boundary condition:
.br
0 = daily groundwater table depth (cm) is input
.br
1 = Given flux 
.br
2 = seepage or infiltration from/to deep groundwater
.br
3 = Flux calculated as a function of h
.br
4 = given pressure-head (gwlevel) at bottom
.br
5 = Zero flux at bottom
.br
6 = Free drainage
.TP
.B initprof
0 = water content profile (need theta_initial array in the soil section) 
.br
1 = pressure head profile (need h_initial array in the soil section) 
.br
2 = Calculate pressure head profile (need gw_initial in soil section)
.TP
.B gw_initial
initial ground-water level in cm below field-level (needed if 
.B 
initprof = 2)
.TP
.B swredu
Reduction of soil evaporation 
.br
0 = no reduction 
.br
1 = the Black (1969) model is used
.br
2 = the Boesten (1986) model is used
.br
3 = an adapted version of the Boesten (1986) model is used. This version takes into
account the actual moisture condition of the soil surface.
.TP
.B cofred
the factor alfa in Black or Beta in Boesten. This is not needed for swredu = 0.
.TP
.B smooth
Integer value giving the size of the running average used for smoothing 
th ksat, theta_saturation and residual_water profile. Set to zero for no smoothing.
.TP
.B gwlevel
water level at bottom of profile, needed if bottom = 4
.TP
.B layers
number of soil layers in calculation (how many real (physical) layers
exist is specified in the layers_n sections)
.TP
.B pondmx
maximum amount of ponding (in cm) at the top of the profile, defaults to 0.0.
.TP
.B speed
Integer value ranging from 1 (slow) to 6 (fastest) determining
the trade-of between calculation accuracy and speed. This options
combines the settings in dtmin, thetol, solvemet, mktable,
maxitr and noit.
If you also specify one of these variables seperately the settings
from speed are overridden. Default  for speed is 3.
.TP
.B dtmax
maximum timestep (in days) in soil module. Lower this one if you
experience large mass balance errors. 
.TP
.B tm_mult
Multiplier used in estimating dt. Default = 3. Lower this if you have
large mass balance errors.
.TP
.B dtmin
minimum timestep (in days) in soil module. If you set dtmin and
dtmax to equal values 
.B vamps
is forced to use a fixed timestep.
If you suspect
.B vamps
could run faster increasing this variable could help. On the other
hand itterations in vamps are very expensive (in time) so if vamps
starts itterating a lot to get convergence you'll end up with
a slow run.
.TP
.B maxitr
Maximum number of iterations in the soil module. Iterations
are only performed if noit != 1.
.TP
.B thetol
Theta tolerance. If noit != 1 (by default) 
.B vamps
will use this value to check if the solution is good enough and
perform iterations if needed. Setting this value to high or low
gives poor results. The default value usually works fine. If
you have no problems you better leave this one alone. Usually
this variable should be between 1.0E-2 and 1.0E-5.
See also
.B mbck
.TP
.B mbck
If set to one
.B vamps
uses a simple mass balance calculation to check convergence in stead
of using
.B thetol.
This method is experimental but it is usually faster (depending on the
.B mbalerr
variable) for the same accuracy as the original method (usign thetol).
The thetol variable is still used in estimating the initial
timestep.
See also
.B mbalerr
.TP
.B mbalerr
If 
.B mbck
is set you can use this variable to determine than required mass
balance accuracy at each timestep. A value between 1.0E-2 and 1.0E-5 is
usually the best. Default is 0.5E-3
.TP
.B solvemet
Determines how vamps solves the equation matrix.
If set to 0 the default (tridiagonal) solution is used.
If set to 1 the soil module will always treat the solution as a band-diagonal
matrix. If set to 2 a very general solution is used. This solution
includes a step to regain full machine precision but is rather slow.
.TP
.B noit
If set to 1 the soil module won't check for convergence of solution.
It assumes that the initial maximum dt is a good guess. Things can be
quit a lot faster in all cases but can give poor results in some cases.
.TP
.B mktable
if set to true 
.B vamps
will create look up tables for the theta vs K relation, and use those
in stead of the function during iteration.  By default this option is
set to false. Set to true to speed up calculation. The solution can
become instable at high suction heads. In stead of letting 
.B vamps
generate the look-up tables you can also read pre-made tables
using the method option in the layer_n section.

Depending on the problem, the amount of memory you have installed, the
floating-point performance of you CPU and the optimizations your
compiler can make, this option can speed up calculations by 50%. You will
lose some precision in the process. By default the program uses 300
points long look-up tables. Use the tablesize variable in the soil
section to change this value.

There is no exact way to determine the speed increase you will
get. For example, on a 66Mhz 486DX2 running Linux, a 25% speed
increase was established without compiler optimization (gcc) while a
50% speed increase was measured when de program was compiled with
optimization. It seems that gcc does a better job optimizing the look
up procedure than the intensive floating point calculations in the van
Genuchten equation. On a RISC processor with better floating point
performance this balance will be different, and you probably won't get
speed increases of 50%. On a rs6000 365 running AIX 3.2 the mktables
option resulted in a 23% speed increase.

.TP
.B estdmc
if set to true and the mktable var is also true the dmc table will be
made using ts_slopes and the Pf curve in stead of the h2dmc function. If
you use S-Lang soil functions and you define estdmc to be true you don't
need the h2dmc function.

.TP
.B tablesize
Sets the size of the look-up tables. Defaults to 300. Increase this
for better accuracy at a penalty of using more memory and some
performance loss. Provided the program fits in physical memory table
sizes up to 1200 points still give some speed improvements compared to
not using the look-up tables.  Sometimes decreasing this to 80 or so
can be done without much loss of accuracy.
.TP
.B dumptables
If set to true the look up tables will be dumped to the initial
section of the output-file; x and y in separate variables.
.TP
.B verbose
verbose level in soil module (0 = silent)
.TP
.B smddepth
If this variable is set the SMD (soil moisture deficit) will
be calculated until this depth. Otherwise the rooting depth
will be taken.
.TP
.B fieldcap
Head in cm at which the soil is at field capacity. Needed for
determination of soil moisture deficit. Default = -100.0
.SH [drainage]
.TP
.B method
Variable which controls the type of lateral drainage.
.br
0 = no lateral drainage
.br
1 = TOPOG type drainage (only at saturation)
.br
2 = allow also unsaturated lateral flow
.br
If the drainage variable is larger then zero the 
.B slope
variable must be set also.
.TP
.B slope
Slope used in the calculation of lateral drainage
.TP
.B exclude
Array with layers in which lateral drainage is not allowed. 
0 <= value < layers
example:
.br
exclude = 12 1 23 45
.br
You can use a construction like this and a no-flow bottom boundary
to simulate a lysimeter.

.SH [soilsectionname]
This section can have 
.I any
name and contains the soil specific info.  The soilsection variable
in the layer_n section refers to this section.
.TP
.B method
method for k vs theta relation:
.br 
0 = clapp/hornberger 
.br
1 = van Genuchten 
.br
2 = not yet implemented
.br
3 = van Genuchten parameters are determined from theta vs pf
pairs. Given values of alpha and n are used as initial
guesses. Required variables: theta (array of values) and pf (array of
values). Optional: alpha and n.  The exponent l is set to 0.5.
.br
4 = read 
.B TOPOG 
.B _soil 
soil tables. 
.B vamps
Has the ability to read and use soil tables generated by the 
.B TOPOG
.B _soil 
program. It will then use these look-up tables in stead of
using direct calculations. In future 
.B vamps 
will be distributed with it's own version of the 
.B _soil 
program
.br
5 = user defined S-Lang functions
.br
See the file soilf.sl in the lib directory for more info.
In this case the user must define the following functions:
.br
thenode...

.TP
.B description
an optional description of the soil layer
.TP
.B ksat
saturated hydraulic conductivity of the layer
.TP
.B kh/kv
Ratio of Ksat horizontal divided by Ksat vertical. This
is only used if you use lateral drainage (see drainage section).
By default this is set to one.
.TP
.B thetas
theta at saturation (porosity)
.TP 
.B psisat
Head at saturation (air entry value) needed for Clapp/Hornberger
.TP
.B b
Factor b in Clapp/Hornberger
.TP 
.B theta_residual
residual amount of soil moisture
.TP
.B alpha
alpha in van Genuchten
.TP
.B l
l in van Genuchten (use 0.5 if not determined)
.TP
.B n
n in van Genuchten
.TP
.B tablefile
File from which the soil table should be read. Only needed if method = 3.
.TP
.B tablefiletype
Type of the table-file. All filetypes can have comment-lines starting with #
.br
1) TOPOG 
.B vamps
only uses columns 1, 3 4 and 5.
.br
2) White space separated columns (psi theta k) in this case the differential
moisture capacity (d_theta/d_phi) is estimated using ts_slopes.
.br
3) White space separated columns (psi theta k diff_moist)
.br
Note that all tables should be made with 
.I descending 
theta values.


.SH [layer_n]
Only the layer_0 section is a must. The rest is only needed if you
have more than one physical soil layer.

.TP
.B thickness
thickness of the layer (in cm)
.TP
.B soilsection
Name of the section that contains the soiltype info for this layer (node).


.SH SUMMARY OUTPUT FILE

.SH [header]
.TP
.B run_start_time
Time at which the run started.
.TP
.B command
The command that made  this file. This  can be something like:
.br
 vamps -v -o myfile infile
.TP
.B defaultsfile
The name of the file from which the program defaults for this run have
been read.
.TP
.B infilename
The name of the vamps input file used in this run

.SH [initial]
.TP
.B steps
Number of time-steps in this run.
.TP
.B layers
Number of soil layers in this run.
.TP
.B volini
Initial water content of the profile.
.TP
.B volsat
Water content of the the profile at saturation.
.TP
.B z
Array with actual depth (in cm) of each layer
.TP
.B theta
Initial water content of the profile for each layer
.TP
.B h
Initial head of the profile for each layer.
.TP
.B k
initial unsaturated conductivity for each layer
.TP
.B as_above
Variable which shows if a layer inherited setting from the above layer
or not.

.SH [t_n]
.TP
.B t
Actual date at timestep n.
.TP
.B ra
Aerodynamic resistance
.TP
.B rs
Canopy resistance
.TP
.B rho
Density of air
.TP
.B ea
Actual vapour pressure
.TP
.B es
Vapour pressure at saturation
.TP
.B gamma
The factor gamma in Penman-Montheith
.TP
.B slope
Slope of the vapour pressure deficit vs ?? line (Penman-Montheith)
.TP
.B L
L in Penman-Montheith
.TP
.B Cp
Cp in Penman-Montheith
.TP
.B interception
Canopy interception in cm
.TP
.B transpiration
Potential transpiration of the canopy
.TP
.B stemflow
Amount of stemflow in cm
.TP
.B throughfall
Amount of throughfall in cm
.TP
.B dt
Last timestep (size) of time t.
.TP
.B avgtheta
average theta of the whole profile
.TP 
.B SMD
Soil moisture deficit in the layer in which rooting 
takes place or until the depth specified with the
.B smddepth
variable in the soil section.
.TP
.B pond
Amount of ponding at time t (or timestep n)
.TP
.B surface_runoff
Cumulative surface runoff.
.TP
.B runots 
The amount of surface runoff for this timestep.
.TP
.B cumeva
Cumulative actual soil evaporation
.TP
.B cumtra
Cumulative actual transpiration 
.TP
.B cumprec
Cumulative precipitation
.TP
.B cumintc
Cumulative interception
.TP
.B cqbot
Cumulative flow through bottom of the profile, calculated from change in
pore volume. This does 
.I not
work if the profile is saturated!
.TP
.B cumtop
Cumulative flow through the top of the profile
.TP
.B qtop
Flow through the top of the profile (this timestep)
.TP
.B qbot
Flow through the bottom of the profile
.TP
.B cumbot
Cumulative flow through bottom of the profile
.TP
.B rootextract
Water extracted by roots (cumulative)
.TP
.B soilevaporation
Actual soilevaporation [cm]
.TP
.B precipitation
Precipitation [cm]
.TP
.B intc
Interception [cm]
.TP
.B masbal
Error in cumulative mass balance [cm]
.TP
.B volact
Amount of water in the soil profile [cm]
.TP
.B ptra
Potential transpiration [cm]
.TP
.B theta
Water content for each layer in the profile
.TP
.B k
Unsaturated conductivity for each layer in the profile [cm/d]
.TP
.B h
(suction)head for each layer in the profile [cm]
.TP
.B q
flux of water through each layer in the profile for the last dt of
this timestep
.TP
.B inq
Total flux of water through each layer of the profile for this timestep
.TP
.B qrot
Water extracted by root in this timestep for each layer of the profile
.TP
.B converror
If set to 1 no convergence was reached during this timestep
.TP
.B itter
Number of iterations used in the last dt of this timestep
.TP
.B CPU
CPU seconds used thisfar.


.SH [trailer]
.TP
.B run_end_time
Date and time at which the present run ended 

.SH SUMMARY OF DEFAULTS FILE
.SH [vamps]
.TP 
.B verbose
FALSE = silent
.br
TRUE = display progress information
.TP
.B header 
(See also the \*(--Header option in
.BR vamps (1))
.br
FALSE = no header in output
.br
TRUE = header in output
.TP
.B max_sec_in_ts
Maximum number of seconds allowed in a single timestep during calculations. A value
of zero (default) disables this check. Usefull for debugging purposes only. A SIGALARM
is raised if the value is exceeded and 
.B vamps
will switch to interactive mode.
.TP
.B logging
FALSE = no logging is done
.br
TRUE = logging is on
.TP
.B logfilename
name of the file to which logging is performed
.TP
.B iniinmem
TRUE = the input file is read into memory (some speedup)
.br
FALSE = the input file is not read into memory
.TP
.B progstr
String which is used to display progress information (use 0, 1 or 2
for build in strings).  0 will show calculation time and estimated
time to go. 1 will show a percentage finished bar and 2 will show
'calculating'.

You can define your own such as:
.br
Vamps is running, please wait......................
.TP
.B graphcommand
full path to 
.B gnuplot
with optional command line options. In OS/2 only gnuplot.exe should be
specified here. This seems to be a 'bug' in the emx library.
.TP
.B commentchars
Character(s) that denotes the start of a comment. This defaults to #% and
the first character should
.I not
be changed unless you have a very good reason to do so.
.TP
.B noslang
If this variable is set to true no S-Lang functions will be
used.
.TP
.B xtrasl
comma seperated  list of S-Lang files to be loaded a startup
.TP
.B sl_in_input
If set to  1 the input file is also processed through the S-Lang
interpreter. You will need ifdef structures to make sure only
S-Lang code is used by the interpreter.
Example:
.br
#ifdef VAMPS
.br
put S-Lang code here..
.br
#else
.br
Put 'normal' input instuctions here..
.br
#endif
.br


.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
.RS
.nf
.ft CW
/*
Copyright (C) 1995 Jaap Schellekens.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option)
any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to the
Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
(C) Jaap Schellekens                   |
Faculty of Earth Sciences	       |	International Institute 
Vrije Universiteit 		       |	for Tropical Forestry
De Boelelaan 1085		       |	Rio Piedras
1081 HV Amsterdam		       |	Puerto Rico, USA
The Netherlands                        |
E-mail: schj@geo.vu.nl 		       |
	schj@xs4all.nl                 |
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Parts of this program derived from swap.  The following is taken from
the swap Fortran code:

   Author : Jan G. Wesseling

                     Correspondence

This program uses the ideas and experiences of various researchers at the
Winand Staring Centre and the Wageningen Agricultural University. Currently
the program is maintained and documented in cooperation by :

     Dept. of Agrohydrology             Dept. of Water Resources
     Winand Staring Centre              Wageningen Agricultural University
     Marijkeweg 11/22                   Nieuwe Kanaal 11
     6700 AC  Wageningen                6709 PA  Wageningen
      The Netherlands                    The Netherlands
     Fax: +31 8370 24812                Fax: +31 8370 84885
*/
.ft R
.fi
.RE

.SH AUTHOR
J. Schellekens
.br
schj@geo.vu.nl
\"  LocalWords:  ksat
